



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 T. Lemon
Internet-Draft                                                Apple Inc.
Intended status: Best Current Practice                            J. Hui
Expires: 11 July 2024                                         Google LLC
                                                          8 January 2024


   Automatically Connecting Stub Networks to Unmanaged Infrastructure
                       draft-ietf-snac-simple-06

Abstract

   This document describes a set of practices for connecting stub
   networks to adjacent infrastructure networks.  This is applicable in
   cases such as constrained (Internet of Things) networks where there
   is a need to provide functional parity of service discovery and
   reachability between devices on the stub network and devices on an
   adjacent infrastructure link (for example, a home network).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 11 July 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Interoperability Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.2.  Usability Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   2.  Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Conventions and Terminology Used in This Document . . . . . .   9
   5.  Support for adjacent infrastructure links . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Managing addressability on an adjacent infrastructure
           link  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       5.1.1.  Suitable On-Link Prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       5.1.2.  State Machine for maintaining a suitable on-link prefix
               on an infrastructure link . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.2.  Managing addressability on the stub network . . . . . . .  16
       5.2.1.  Maintenance across SNAC router restarts . . . . . . .  16
       5.2.2.  Generating a per-stub-router ULA Site Prefix  . . . .  17
       5.2.3.  Using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation to acquire a prefix to
               provide addressability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     5.3.  Managing reachability on the adjacent infrastructure
           link  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     5.4.  Managing reachability on the stub network . . . . . . . .  20
     5.5.  Providing discoverability between stub network links and
           infrastructure network links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
       5.5.1.  Discoverability by hosts on adjacent infrastructure
               links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
       5.5.2.  Providing discoverability of adjacent infrastructure
               hosts on the stub network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   6.  Providing reachability to IPv4-only services to hosts on the
           stub network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.1.  NAT64 provided by infrastructure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     6.2.  NAT64 provided by SNAC router(s)  . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   7.  Handling partitioning events on a stub network  . . . . . . .  27
   8.  Services Provided by SNAC routers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   11. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   12. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Appendix A.  Analysis of deployment scenarios in which a SNAC
           router could cause problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     A.1.  Unmanaged home network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     A.2.  Use on an unmanaged (non-home) IPv6 network . . . . . . .  32
     A.3.  Use on a managed network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
       A.3.1.  Managed networks where DHCPv6 is required but RA guard
               is not present  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
       A.3.2.  Use on a managed network without IPv6 . . . . . . . .  34
   Appendix B.  Router Advertisements on the Infrastructure
           Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   Appendix C.  Router Advertisments on the stub network . . . . . .  36
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38

1.  Introduction

   This document describes a set of practices for automatically
   connecting IPv6 stub networks to adjacent infrastructure networks.
   The connection is enabled through a Stub Network Auto-Configuring
   router, or SNAC router.  There are several use cases for stub
   networks.  Motivating factors include:

   *  Incompatible speed: for example, an IEEE 802.15.4 network could
      not be easily bridged to a WiFi network because the data rates are
      so dissimilar.  So either it must be bridged in a very complicated
      and careful way to avoid overwhelming the 802.15.4 network with
      irrelevant traffic, or the 802.15.4 network needs to be a separate
      subnet.

   *  Incompatible media: for example, a constrained 802.15.4 network
      connected as a stub network to a WiFi or ethernet infrastructure
      network.  In the case of an 802.15.4 network, it is quite possible
      that the devices used to link the infrastructure network to the
      stub network will not be conceived of by the end user as routers.
      Consequently, we cannot assume that these devices will be on all
      the time.  A solution for this use case will require some sort of
      commissioning process for stub routers, and can't assume that any
      particular stub router will always be available; rather, any stub
      router that is available must be able to adapt to current
      conditions to provide reachability.

   *  Incompatible mechanisms: the medium of the stub network may not,
      for example, use neighbor discovery to populate a neighbor table.
      If the infrastructure network (as is typical) does use neighbor
      discovery, then bridging the two networks together would require
      some way of translating between neighbor discovery and whatever
      mechanism is used on the stub network, and hence complicates
      rather than simplifying the problem of connecting the two
      networks.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   *  Incompatible framing: if the stub network is a 6lowpan [RFC4944]
      network, packets on the stub network are expected to use 6lowpan
      header compression [RFC6282].  Making this work through a bridge
      would be very difficult.

   *  Convenience: end users often connect devices to each other in
      order to extend networks

   *  Transitory connectivity: a mobile device acting as a router for a
      set of co-located devices could connect to a network and gain
      access to services for itself and for the co-located devices.
      Such a stub network is unlikely to have more than one stub router.

   What makes stub networks a distinct type of network is simply that a
   stub network never provides transit between networks to which it is
   connected.  The term "stub" refers to the way the network is seen by
   the link to which it is connected: there is reachability through a
   stub network router to devices on the stub network from the
   infrastructure link, but there is no reachability through the stub
   network to any link beyond that one.

   Eliminating transit routing is not intended to be seen as a virtue in
   itself, but rather as a simplifying assumption that makes it possible
   to solve a subset of the general problem of automating multi-link
   networks.  Stub networks may be globally reachable, or may be only
   locally reachable.  A host on a locally reachable stub network can
   only interoperate with hosts on the network link(s) to which it is
   connected.  A host on a globally reachable stub network should be
   able to interoperate with hosts on other network links in the same
   infrastructure as well as hosts on the global internet.

   It may be noted that just as you can plug several Home Gateway
   devices together in series to form multi-layer NATs, there is nothing
   preventing the owner of a stub network router from attaching it to a
   stub network as if that network were its infrastructure network.  In
   the case of an IoT wireless network, there may be no way to do this,
   nor would it be desirable, but a stub router that uses ethernet on
   both the infrastructure and stub network sides could be connected
   this way.  Nothing in this document is intended to prevent this from
   being done, but neither do we attempt to solve the problems that this
   could create.

   The goal of this document is to describe the minimal set of changes
   or behaviors required to use existing IETF specifications to support
   the stub network use case.  The result is intended to be deployable
   on existing networks without requiring changes to those networks.





Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


1.1.  Interoperability Goals

   The specific goal is for hosts on the stub network to be able to
   interoperate with hosts on the adjacent infrastructure link or links.
   What we mean by "interoperate" is that a host on a stub network:

   *  is discoverable by hosts attached to adjacent infrastructure links

   *  is able to discover hosts attached to adjacent infrastructure
      links

   *  is able to discover hosts on the Internet

   *  is able to acquire an IP address that can be used to communicate
      with hosts attached to adjacent infrastructure links

   *  has reachability to the hosts attached to adjacent infrastructure
      links

   *  is reachable by hosts on the adjacent infrastructure link

   *  is able to reach hosts on the Internet

   Discoverability here means "discoverable using DNS, or DNS Service
   Discovery".  DNS Service Discovery includes multicast DNS [RFC6762].
   As an example, when one host connected to a specific WiFi network
   wishes to discover services on hosts connected to that same WiFi
   network, it can do so using multicast DNS.  Similarly, when a host on
   some other network wishes to discover the same service, it must use
   DNS-based DNS Service Discovery [RFC6763].  In both cases,
   "discoverable using DNS" means that the host has one or more entries
   in the DNS that serve to make it discoverable.

   We lump discoverability in with reachability and addressability, both
   of which are essentially Layer 3 issues.  The reason for this is that
   it does us no good to automatically set up connectivity between stub
   network hosts and infrastructure hosts if the infrastructure hosts
   have no means to learn about the availability of services provided by
   stub network hosts.  For stub network hosts that only consume cloud
   services this will not be an issue, but for stub networks that
   provide services, such as IoT devices on stub networks with
   incompatible media, discoverability is necessary in order for stub
   network connectivity to be useful.

   Ability to acquire an IP address that can be used to communicate
   means that the IP address a host on the stub network acquires can be
   used to communicate with it by hosts not on the stub network.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Reachability to hosts on adjacent infrastructure links means that
   when a host (A) on the stub network has a datagram destined for the
   IP address of a host (B) on an adjacent infrastructure link, host (A)
   knows of a next-hop router to which it can send the datagram, so that
   it will ultimately reach host (B) on the infrastructure network.

   Reachability from hosts on adjacent infrastructure links means that
   when host (A) on an adjacent infrastructure link has a datagram
   destined for the IP address of a host (B) on the stub network, a
   next-hop router is known by host (A) such that, when the datagram is
   sent to that router, it will ultimately reach host (B) on the stub
   network.

   To achieve the reachability goal described above, this document
   assumes hosts attempting to reach destinations on the stub network
   maintain a routing table - Type C hosts as defined in Section 3.1 of
   [RFC4191]).  Type A and Type B hosts are out-of-scope for this
   document.

1.2.  Usability Goals

   In addition to the interoperability goals we've described above, the
   additional goal for stub networks is that they be able to be
   connected automatically, with no user intervention.  The experience
   of connecting a stub network to an infrastructure network should be
   as straightforward as connecting a new host to the same
   infrastructure network.

   SNAC routers can be attached to any network.  However, there are
   network configurations where a SNAC router will not work.  An
   analysis of networks where SNAC routers could be attached is provided
   in Appendix A.

2.  Glossary

   Node:  A device that implements IPv6.

   Router:  A node that forwards IPv6 packets not explicitly addressed
      to itself.  (See Note in Section 2 of [RFC8200].)

   Host:  Any node that is not a router.  (See Note in Section 2 of
      [RFC8200].)

   Addressability:  The ability to associate each node on a link with
      its own IPv6 address.

   Reachability:  Given an IPv6 destination address that is not on-link




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


      for any link to which a node is attached, the information required
      that allows the node to send packets to a router that can forward
      those packets towards a link where the destination address is on-
      link.

   Adjacent Infrastructure Link (AIL):  any link to which a stub network
      router is directly attached, that is part of an infrastructure
      network and is not the stub network.

   Home Gateway:  A device, such as a CE Router [RFC7084], that is
      intended to connect a single uplink network to a Local-Area
      Network.  A CE router may be provided by an ISP and only capable
      of connecting directly to the ISP's means of service delivery,
      e.g.  Cable or DSL, or it may have an ethernet port on the WAN
      side and one or more ethernet ports, plus WiFi, on the LAN side.

   Infrastructure network:  the network infrastructure to which a stub
      router connects.  This network can be a single link, or a network
      of links.  The network is typically formed by a Home Gateway,
      which may also provide some services, such as a DNS resolver, a
      DHCPv4 server, and a DHCPv6 prefix delegation server, for example.

   Off-Stub-Network-Routable (OSNR) Prefix:  a prefix advertised on the
      stub network that can be used for communication with hosts not on
      the stub network.

   Stub Network:  A network link that is connected by one or more Stub
      Routers to an AIL an infrastructure network, but is not used for
      transit between that link and any other link.  Section 2.1 of
      [RFC2328] describes the distinction between stub networks and
      transit networks from a topological perspective: a stub network is
      simply any network that does not provide transit within a routing
      fabric.  There is reachability through a stub network router to
      hosts on the stub network, but there is no reachability through
      the stub network to any link beyond the stub network link.

   Stub Router:  A router that provides connectivity between a stub
      network and an infrastructure network.  A stub router may also
      provide connectivity between other networks: the term "stub
      router" refers specifically to its role in providing connectivity
      to a stub network.  For example, a Home Gateway may provide
      connectivity between a provider network (WAN) and a home network
      (LAN), while at the same time providing connectivity between the
      LAN and a stub network.  What distinguishes the LAN from the stub
      network in this case is that the LAN is potentially a candidate to
      act as a transit network to reach other routers, whereas the stub
      network is not.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   SNAC Router:  A Stub Network Auto-Configuring Router.  This is a stub
      router that implements the autoconfiguration methods defined by
      this specification.

   RA Beacon:  A Router Advertisement (RA) message that is multicast on
      a link so that hosts can see that the router is still present.
      This is in contrast to a unicast RA message sent in response to
      the Router Solicitation message.

   ULA Site Prefix:  A Unique Local Address /48 prefix [RFC4193]
      randomly generated by each SNAC router for use in allocating ULA
      Link Prefixes to the stub network and the adjacent infrastructure
      link.

   ULA Link Prefix:  A Unique Local Address /64 prefix allocated from
      the ULA site prefix.  SNAC routers can use ULA Link prefixes to
      provide addressability on the stub network and/or adjacent
      infrastructure link as needed.  If a SNAC router is doing NAT64,
      the NAT64 prefix is also a ULA Link Prefix.  A total of 65,536 ULA
      link prefixes can be allocated from the ULA Site prefix.

3.  Constants

   This section describes the meaning of and gives default values for
   various constants used in this document.

   STALE_RA_TIME (default: 10 minutes):  The amount of time that can
      pass after the last time a Router Advertisement message from a
      particular router has been received before we assume the router is
      no longer present.  This is a stopgap in case the router is
      reachable but has silently stopped advertising a prefix; this
      situation is unlikely, but if it does happen, new devices joining
      the infrastructure network will not be able to reach devices on
      the stub network until the SNAC router decides that the router
      that advertised the suitable prefix is stale.

   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (default: 30 minutes):  The valid and
      preferred lifetime the SNAC router will advertise.  This should be
      long enough that a host is actually willing to use it, and
      obviously should also be long enough that a missed RA will not
      cause the host to stop using it.  The values suggested here allow
      ten RAs to be missed before the host will stop using the prefix.

   RA_BEACON_INTERVAL (default: 3 minutes):  How often the SNAC router
      will transmit an RA beacon.  This should be frequent enough that a
      missed Router Solicitation message (e.g. due to congestion on a
      WiFi link) will not result in an extremely long outage (assuming
      the congestion passes before the RA is sent, of course).



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   PREFIX_DELEGATION_INTERVAL (default: 30 minutes):  The lifetime a
      SNAC router should request for a DHCPv6-delegated prefix.  The
      longer this is, the more prefixes will be consumed on a network
      where SNAC routers are not stable.  The lifetime here is chosen to
      be long enough that a reboot of the DHCP server will not prevent
      the prefix being renewed.  It happens to coincide with the value
      of STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME, but the two should not be
      considered to be equivalent.

   MAX_FLAGS_COPY_TIME (default: 150 minutes):  The maximum time period,
      after receiving an RA, that a SNAC router can copy flag bit values
      from the header of this RA for use in its own transmitted RAs.

   MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME (default: 60 seconds):  The maximum
      ReachableTime value that a router can have in the Neighbor
      Table before any suitable prefixes it has advertised are no longer
      considered suitable.

   STUB_NETWORK_REACHABLE_TIME (default: 30 minutes)  The reachable time
      that will be specified in Route Information Options sent by the
      SNAC router

4.  Conventions and Terminology Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

5.  Support for adjacent infrastructure links

   We assume that the AIL supports Neighbor Discovery [RFC4861], and
   specifically that routers and on-link prefixes can be advertised
   using Router Advertisement messages and discovered using Neighbor
   Solicitation messages.  The stub network link may also support this,
   or may use some different mechanism.  This section specifies how
   advertisement of the on-link prefix for such links is managed.  In
   this section we will use the term "Advertising Interface" as
   described in Section 6.2.2 of [RFC4861].

   Support for AILS on networks where Neighbor Discovery is not
   supported is out of scope for this document.  SNAC routers do not
   provide routing between AILs when connected to more than one such
   link.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


5.1.  Managing addressability on an adjacent infrastructure link

   In order to provide IPv6 routing to the stub network, IPv6 addressing
   must be available on each AIL.  Ideally such addressing is already
   present on these links, and need not be provided.  However, if it is
   not present, the SNAC router must provide it.

5.1.1.  Suitable On-Link Prefixes

   SNAC routers must evaluate prefixes that are advertised on-link as to
   their suitability for use in communicating with devices on the stub
   network.  If no suitable prefix is found, a SNAC router MUST
   advertise one.

   An on-link prefix is considered suitable if it is advertised on the
   link in a Prefix Information option ([RFC4861], Section 4.6.2) with
   the following Prefix Information option header values:

   *  Prefix Length value is 64,

   *  'L' flag bit is set and

   *  either the 'A' flag bit or the 'P' flag bit
      [I-D.ietf-6man-pio-pflag] is set, and

   *  Preferred Lifetime of 30 minutes or more.

   A prefix is not considered a suitable on-link prefix if the 'L' flag
   bit is not set, or if neither the 'A' flag bit nor the 'P' flag bit
   is set.  When the 'A' flag bit is not set, this indicates that
   individual node addresses within the prefix are being managed using
   DHCPv6.  If the 'P' flag bit is set, then hosts that wish to allocate
   their own addresses can do so by acquiring a prefix from which to
   allocate them using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation [RFC9663].  Nodes are
   not required to use DHCPv6 to acquire individual addresses, so a
   prefix that requires the use of DHCPv6 for that purpose can't be
   considered "suitable"—not all hosts can actually use it.

   Note: there can be layer two networks where neighbor discovery is not
   supported and therefore we cannot set the 'L' flag bit, but could set
   the 'A' flag bit.  The behavior of stub networks when connecting to
   such networks is out of scope for this document.

   A prefix is considered to be advertised on the link if, when a Router
   Solicitation message ([RFC4861], Section 4.1) is sent, a Router
   Advertisement message is received in response which contains a prefix
   information option ([RFC4861], Section 4.6.2) for that prefix.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   After an RA message containing a suitable prefix has been received,
   it can be assumed for some period of time thereafter that that prefix
   is still valid on the link.  However, prefix lifetimes and router
   lifetimes are often quite long.  In addition to knowing that a prefix
   has been advertised on the link in the past, and is still valid, we
   must therefore ensure that at least one router that has advertised
   this prefix is still alive to respond to Router Advertisement
   messages.

5.1.2.  State Machine for maintaining a suitable on-link prefix on an
        infrastructure link

   The possible states of an interface connected to an AIL are described
   here, along with actions required to be taken to monitor the state.
   The purpose of the state machine described here is to ensure that at
   all times, when a new host arrives on the AIL, it is able to acquire
   an IPv6 address on that link.

   During all of the states mentioned here except for state-unknown, the
   SNAC router is expected to treat the infrastructure interface as an
   Advertising Interface as described in Section 6.2.2 of [RFC4861].
   There are two sets of information that need to be sent in an RA; if
   neither is present, then the SNAC router SHOULD NOT send an RA even
   if it is treating the infrastructure interface as an advertising
   interface.

   These two sets of information are the on-link prefix, if any, that is
   to be advertised.  Whether or not such a prefix is advertised, and
   what exactly is advertised regarding that prefix, is determined by
   the state machine.  The other set of information is a set of routes
   to prefixes on the stub network.  Whenever we know of a reachable
   (scope is not link-local) prefix on the stub network, we include an
   RIO option in the RA on the infrastructure network indicating that
   that prefix is reachable through the SNAC router.

   It is important to note that it is possible for an on-link, routable
   prefix to be advertised and then withdrawn on the stub network, but
   for it to still be valid, and for there to still be some
   communication occurring using that prefix.  In order to avoid
   prematurely interrupting such communication, the SNAC router MUST
   maintain a list of prefixes known to be valid on the stub network,
   even if those prefixes have been deprecated, and MUST include RIO
   options for all such prefixes in the RAs that it sends on the
   adjacent infrastructure link.







Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


5.1.2.1.  Status of IP addressability on adjacent infrastructure link
          unknown (STATE-UNKNOWN)

   When the SNAC router interface first connects to the AIL, it MUST
   begin router discovery.

   If, after router discovery has completed, no suitable on-link prefix
   has been found, the router moves this interface to STATE-BEGIN-
   ADVERTISING (Section 5.1.2.3).

   If, during router discovery, a suitable on-link prefix is found, the
   router moves the interface to STATE-SUITABLE (Section 5.1.2.2).

   In this state, the SNAC router MUST NOT treat this interface as an
   advertising interface as described in Section 6.2.2 of [RFC4861].

5.1.2.2.  IP addressability already present on adjacent infrastructure
          link (STATE-SUITABLE)

   When a new host appears on the AIL and sends an initial Router
   Solicitation message, if it does not receive a suitable on-link
   prefix, it will not be able to communicate.  Consequently, the SNAC
   router MUST monitor Router Solicitation and Router Advertisement
   messages on the interface in order to determine whether a prefix that
   has been advertised on the link is still being advertised.  To
   accomplish this we have two complementary methods: router staleness
   detection and neighbor unreachability detection.

5.1.2.2.1.  Router staleness detection

   The SNAC router MUST listen for Router Advertisement messages on the
   AIL to which the interface is attached, and record the time at which
   each Router Advertisement was received.  The router MUST NOT consider
   any Router Advertisement that is older than STALE_RA_TIME to be
   suitable.  When the last non-stale Router Advertisement message
   containing a suitable prefix on the link is marked stale, the SNAC
   router MUST move the interface to STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING.

5.1.2.2.2.  Router Unreachability Detection

   For each suitable route, the SNAC router MUST monitor the state of
   reachability to the router(s) that advertised it as described in
   ([RFC4861], Section 7.3.1) using a ReachableTime value of no more
   than MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME.  The reason for this is that if no
   router providing the on-link prefix on the AIL is reachable, then
   when a new host joins the network, it will have no suitable on-link
   prefix to use for autoconfiguration, and thus will be unable to
   communicate with hosts on the stub network.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Whenever the ReachableTime for a router advertising a suitable prefix
   exceeds MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME, the SNAC router MUST send
   unicast Neighbor Solicitation messages as described in Section 7.2.2
   of [RFC4861] until either a response is received, which resets
   ReachableTime to zero, or the maximum number of retransmissions has
   been sent.

   The SNAC router MUST listen for Router Solicitation messages on the
   AIL.  When a Router Solicitation message is received, if none of the
   on-link routers on the AIL are marked reachable, the SNAC router MUST
   move this interface to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING state
   (Section 5.1.2.3).

   If a RA beacon interval arrives, and there are no routers advertising
   suitable prefixes that have a ReachableTime that is less than
   MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME, then the router MUST move this interface
   to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING state.

5.1.2.3.  IP addressability not present on adjacent infrastructure link
          (STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING)

   In this state, the SNAC router generates its own on-link prefix for
   the interface.  This prefix has a valid and preferred lifetime of
   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME seconds.  The SNAC router sends a
   Router Advertisement (RA) message containing this prefix in a Prefix
   Information Option (PIO).  In the PIO, the 'A' flag bit (autonomous
   configuration) Section 4.6.2 of [RFC4861] MUST be set and the 'L'
   flag bit (on-link prefix) MUST also be set.  Link-layer technologies
   that require the 'L' flag bit to be cleared are out of scope of this
   document.

   The 'SNAC Router' flag bit ([I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]) MUST
   be set in the RA flags field.  The values of the 'M' and 'O' flag
   bits MUST be copied from the respective 'M' and 'O' flag bit values
   seen in the most recent (unicast or multicast) RA received from a
   non-SNAC-router.  For the selection of the most recent RA, the
   following RAs MUST be excluded:

   *  An RA received from a router longer ago than the Router Lifetime
      period indicated in the RA header.  This only applies for a non-
      zero Router Lifetime value.

   *  An RA received more than MAX_FLAGS_COPY_TIME ago.

   If there is no recent RA from a non-SNAC-router, both 'M' and 'O'
   flag bits MUST be cleared, unless the SNAC router rebooted recently.
   After a reboot, if no recent RA is received from a non-SNAC-router,
   but a recent RA has been received from a SNAC router, the values for



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   the 'M' and 'O' flag bits provided by that SNAC router MUST be
   copied.  After MAX_FLAGS_COPY_TIME after reboot, the SNAC router MUST
   go back to the regular behavior defined above.  This avoids a
   situation where a SNAC router that has rebooted starts to advertise
   different 'M' and 'O' flag bit values than other SNAC routers present
   on the same link.

   The sent Router Advertisement message MUST also include a Route
   Information option (Section 2.3 of [RFC4191]) for each routable
   prefix advertised on the stub network.  If the SNAC router is also a
   normal router (e.g. a home WiFi router), it SHOULD include all other
   routes that it is advertising in the RA, if there is space.

   After having sent the initial Router Advertisement, the SNAC router
   moves the interface into the STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE state
   (Section 5.1.2.4).

5.1.2.4.  IP addressability not present on adjacent infrastructure link
          (STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE)

   When entering this state, if the router MUST begin treating the
   interface as an Advertising Interface as described in Section 6.2.2
   of [RFC4861] if it is not already doing so.

   The SNAC router sends a Router Advertisement message, as described in
   Section 5.1.2.3, every RA_BEACON_INTERVAL seconds.

   The SNAC router may receive a Router Advertisement message containing
   one or more suitable on-link prefixes on the AIL.  If any of these
   prefixes are different than the prefix the SNAC router is advertising
   as the on-link suitable prefix, and the 'SNAC Router' flag bit is not
   set in in the Router Advertisement flags field, the SNAC router moves
   the interface to STATE-DEPRECATING (Section 5.1.2.5).

   If the 'SNAC Router' flag bit is set in the RA header flags field,
   then one of the following must be true in order for that prefix to be
   considered suitable:

   *  The prefixes are equal.  In this case, the interface remains in
      STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE.

   *  The prefix the SNAC router is advertising is a ULA prefix
      [RFC4193], and the received prefix is a non-ULA prefix.  In this
      case, the interface moves into the STATE-DEPRECATING
      (Section 5.1.2.5) state.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   *  Both prefixes are ULA prefixes, and the received prefix,
      considered as a 128-bit big-endian unsigned integer, is
      numerically lower, then the interface moves to STATE-DEPRECATING
      (Section 5.1.2.5.

   *  Otherwise the interface remains in STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE.

5.1.2.5.  SNAC router deprecating the on-link prefix it is advertising
          (STATE-DEPRECATING)

   On entry to this state, the SNAC router has been treating the
   interface as an Advertising Interface as described in Section 6.2.2
   of [RFC4861], and MUST continue to do so.

   When the SNAC router has detected the availability of suitable on-
   link prefix on the AIL to which the interface is attached, and that
   prefix is preferable to the one it is advertising, it continues to
   advertise its own prefix, but deprecates it:

   *  the preferred lifetime for its prefix should be set to zero in
      subsequent Router Advertisement messages.

   *  the valid lifetime for its prefix should be reduced with each
      subsequent Router Advertisement messages.

   *  the usability of the infrastructure-provided on-link prefix should
      be monitored as in the STATE-SUITABLE state; if during the
      deprecation period, the SNAC router detects that there are no
      longer any suitable prefixes on the link, as described in
      Section 5.1.2.2.1 or in Section 5.1.2.2.2, it MUST return the
      interface to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING (Section 5.1.2.3) state
      and resume advertising its prefix with the valid and preferred
      lifetimes described there.

   In this state, the valid lifetime (VALID) is computed based on three
   values: the current time when a router advertisement is being
   generated (NOW), the time at which the new suitable on-link prefix
   advertisement was received (DEPRECATE_TIME), and
   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME.  All of these values are in seconds.
   VALID is computed as follows:

   VALID = STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME - (NOW - DEPRECATE_TIME)

   If VALID is less than RA_BEACON_INTERVAL, the SNAC router does not
   include the deprecated prefix in the router advertisement.  Note that
   VALID could be less than zero.  Otherwise, the prefix is provided in
   the advertisement, but with a valid lifetime of VALID.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


5.2.  Managing addressability on the stub network

   How addressability is managed on stub networks depends on the nature
   of the stub network.  For some stub networks, the SNAC router can be
   sure that it is the only router.  For example, a SNAC router that is
   providing a Wi-Fi network for tethering will advertise its own SSID
   and use its own joining credentials; in this case, it can assume that
   it is the only router for that network, and advertise a default route
   and on-link prefix just like any other router.

   However, some stub networks are more cooperative in nature, for
   example IP mesh networks.  On such networks, multiple SNAC routers
   may be present and be providing addressability and reachability.

   In either case, some SNAC router connected to the stub network MUST
   provide a suitable on-link prefix (the OSNR prefix) for the stub
   network.  If the stub network is a multicast-capable medium where
   Router Advertisement messages are used for router discovery, the same
   mechanism described in Section 5.1.2 is used.

   Stub networks that do not support the use of Router Advertisements
   for router discovery must use some similar mechanism that is
   compatible with that type of network.  Describing the process of
   establishing a common OSNR prefix on such networks is out of scope
   for this document.

5.2.1.  Maintenance across SNAC router restarts

   SNAC routers may restart from time to time; when a restart occurs,
   the SNAC router may have been advertising state to the network which,
   following the restart, is no longer required.

   For example, suppose there are two SNAC routers connected to the same
   infrastructure link.  When the first SNAC router is restarted, the
   second takes over providing an on-link prefix.  Now the first router
   rejoins the link.  It sees that the second SNAC router's prefix is
   advertised on the infrastructure link, and therefore does not
   advertise its own.

   This behavior can cause problems because the first SNAC router no
   longer sees the on-link prefix it had been advertising on
   infrastructure as on-link.  Consequently, if it receives a packet to
   forward to such an address, it will forward that packet directly to a
   default router, if one is present; otherwise, it will have no route
   to the destination, and will drop the packet.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   To address this problem, SNAC routers SHOULD remember the last time a
   prefix was advertised across restarts.  On restart, the router
   configures the prefix on its interface but does not advertise it in
   Router Advertisements.  Devices that are still using that prefix will
   be seen as on-link to the router, and so packets will be delivered
   using ND on-link rather than forwarded to the default router.

   When a SNAC router has only flash memory with limited write lifetime,
   it may be inappropriate to do a write to flash every time an RA
   beacon containing a prefix is sent.  In this case, the router SHOULD
   record the set of prefixes that have been advertised on
   infrastructure and the maximum valid lifetime that was advertised.
   On restart, the router should assume that hosts on the infrastructure
   link have received advertisements for any such prefixes.

   When possible, it is best if all SNAC routers serving a particular
   stub network use the same 64-bit prefix on the AIL.  For example,
   Thread SNAC routers use bits from the Thread Extended PAN ID to
   generate the ULA prefix's Global ID and Subnet ID.  The Global ID
   generation conforms to [RFC4193] because the Extended PAN ID is
   generated randomly using the same mechanism that is specified in RFC
   4193 for the ULA prefix bits.

5.2.2.  Generating a per-stub-router ULA Site Prefix

   In order to be able to provide addressability either on the stub
   network or on an adjacent infrastructure network, a SNAC router MUST
   allocate its own ULA Site Pefix.  ULA prefixes, described in Unique
   Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses ([RFC4193]) are randomly allocated
   prefixes.  A SNAC router MUST allocate a single ULA Site Prefix for
   use in providing on-link prefixes to the stub network and the
   adjacent infrastructure link as described in Section 5.1.2.3.

   Any ULA Link Prefixes allocated by a SNAC router SHOULD be maintained
   across reboots, and SHOULD remain stable over time.  (TBD: mention
   the SHOULD exception cases) However, for privacy reasons, a SNAC
   router that roams from network to network SHOULD allocate a different
   ULA Link Prefix each time it connects to a different infrastructure
   network, unless configured to behave otherwise.












Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


5.2.3.  Using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation to acquire a prefix to provide
        addressability

   If DHCPv6 prefix delegation and IPv6 service are both available on
   the infrastructure link, then the SNAC router MUST attempt to acquire
   a prefix using DHCPv6 prefix delegation.  Using a prefix provided by
   the infrastructure DHCPv6 prefix delegation service means (assuming
   the infrastructure is configured correctly) that routing is possible
   between the stub network links and all links on the infrastructure
   network, and possibly to the general internet.

   By contrast, if the prefix generated by the SNAC router is used,
   reachability is only possible between the stub network and the AIL.
   The OSNR prefix in this case is not known to the infrastructure
   network routing fabric, so even though packets might be able to be
   forwarded to the intended destination, there would be no return path.
   So when the only prefix that is available is the one provided by the
   SNAC router, cloud services will not be reachable via IPv6, and
   infrastructure-provided NAT64 will not work.  Therefore, when the
   SNAC router is able to successfully acquire a prefix using DHCPv6 PD,
   it MUST use DHCPv6 PD rather than the ULA Link prefix it allocated
   for the stub network out of its ULA Site Prefix.

   A SNAC router MUST request stub network prefixes with length 64.  It
   does so by sending an IA_PD option for each prefix, each with a
   different IAID, containing an IA_PREFIX with a hint of 64 as
   described in Section 18.3.9. of [RFC8415].  If the SNAC router
   obtains a prefix with length less than 64, it SHOULD generate a /64
   from the obtained prefix by padding with zeros.  If the SNAC router
   obtains a prefix with length greater than 64, the SNAC router MUST
   treat the prefix as unsuitable and allocate a ULA Link Prefix out of
   its ULA Site Prefix instead.

   A DHCPv6-PD client can request a particular lease interval for the
   DHCPv6-delegated prefix.  However, there is no particular reason for
   a SNAC router to specify this interval.

5.2.3.1.  Lifetime of IPv6 prefixes acquired using DHCPv6 Prefix
          Delegation

   It is possible that a SNAC router might obtain a prefix from a DHCPv6
   server using prefix delegation and then something about the
   infrastructure network attachment might change that affects the
   validity of that prefix for use on the stub network.  The section of
   [I-D.ietf-dhc-rfc8415bis] titled "Refreshing Configuration
   Information" discusses the various scenarios that can occur.  We
   assume that the DHCPv6 prefix delegation client being used by the
   SNAC router conforms to this specification.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Situations that can occur include (but are not limited to):

   *  DHCPv6 server becomes unavailable

   *  SNAC router is moved to a different link

   *  A renumnbering event results in the old prefix being replaced with
      a new one

   The SNAC router MUST NOT use a prefix once the DHCPv6-PD client has
   determined that it is no longer valid.  If the DHCPv6-PD client
   provides a new prefix, and the old prefix is still valid, the SNAC
   router SHOULD explicitly deprecate the old prefix at the same time
   that it first advertises the new prefix.

   If the DHCPv6-PD client determines that the prefix it provided to use
   as the OSNR prefix is no longer valid, and no replacement prefix is
   provided by the DHCPv6 server, then the SNAC router MUST switch to
   the ULA link prefix that it has allocated for use on the stub
   network.  In the case that the DHCPv6-PD client is unable to renew
   its lease on the current OSNR prefix, and time between the T2
   interval for the prefix assignment Section 21.4 of
   [I-D.ietf-dhc-rfc8415bis] and the end of the lease has been reached,
   then the SNAC router MUST deprecate the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR
   prefix and begin advertising the ULA link prefix.

   A failure to renew the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR prefix could be
   because the stub network has been disconnected from one AIL and moved
   to a different AIL.  In this situation, if the new AIL also has IPv6
   service and DHCPv6-PD service, the DHCPv6 client will get a clear
   indication that the old prefix is no longer valid.  However, it may
   be that no DHCPv6-PD service is available on the new link, either
   because it is an IPv4-only link or because it's an IPv6-capable link
   that doesn't provide DHCPv6 service.  In this situation, if the stub
   network remains connected to the link and no DHCPv6 service appears,
   the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR prefix will eventually time out and be
   replaced.  The SNAC router SHOULD NOT attempt to replace it prior to
   this normal timeout process, because there is no benefit to changing
   the OSNR prefix on the stub network in such a situation, and it's
   possible that the SNAC router will return to the other link before
   the OSNR prefix expires.










Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


5.3.  Managing reachability on the adjacent infrastructure link

   SNAC routers MUST advertise reachability to stub network OSNR
   prefixes on any AIL to which they are connected.  If the SNAC router
   is advertising a suitable prefix on any interface, any such prefixes
   MUST be advertised on that interface in the same Router Advertisement
   message that is advertising the suitable prefix, to avoid unnecessary
   multicast traffic.

   Each stub network will have some set of prefixes that are advertised
   as on-link for that network.  A SNAC router connected to that stub
   network SHOULD advertise reachability to all such prefixes on any AIL
   to which it is attached using router advertisements.

   A SNAC router SHOULD NOT advertise itself as a default router on an
   AIL by setting a non-zero Router Lifetime value in the header of its
   Router Advertisements.  The exception to this rule is the case where
   the SNAC router itself is the default router for a particular AIL:
   for example, it may be the home router providing connectivity to an
   ISP.

5.4.  Managing reachability on the stub network

   The SNAC router MAY advertise itself as a default router on the stub
   network, if it itself has a default route on the AIL.  In some cases
   it may not be desirable to advertise reachability to the Internet as
   a whole; in this case the SNAC router is not required to advertise
   itself as a default router.

   If the SNAC router is not advertising itself as a default router on
   the stub network, it MUST advertise reachability to any prefixes that
   are being advertised as on-link on AILs to which it is attached.
   This is true for prefixes it is advertising, and for other prefixes
   being advertised on that link.

   Note that in some stub network configurations, it is possible for
   more than one SNAC router to be connected to the stub network, and
   each SNAC router may be connected to a different AIL.  In this case,
   a SNAC router advertising a default route may receive a packet
   destined for a link that is not an AIL for that router, but is an AIL
   for a different router.  In such a case, if the infrastructure is not
   capable of routing between these two AILs, a packet which could have
   been delivered by another SNAC router will be lost by the SNAC router
   that received it.

   Consequently, SNAC routers SHOULD be configurable to not advertise
   themselves as default routers on the stub network.  SNAC routers
   SHOULD be configurable to explicitly advertise AIL prefixes on the



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   stub network even if they are advertising as a default router.  The
   mechanisms by which such configuration can be accomplished are out of
   scope for this document.

   It is also possible that SNAC routers for more than one stub network
   may be connected to the same AIL.  In this case, the SNAC routers
   will be advertising Route Information Options (RIO) in their Router
   Advertisement messages for their OSNR prefixes.  SNAC routers MUST
   track the presence of such routes, and MUST advertise reachability to
   them on interfaces connected to stub networks.

5.5.  Providing discoverability between stub network links and
      infrastructure network links

   Since DNS-SD is in wide use, and provides for ad-hoc, self-
   configuring advertising using the mDNS transport, this is a suitable
   mandatory-to-implement protocol for stub networks, which must be able
   to attach to infrastructure networks without the help of new
   mechanisms provided by the infrastructure.  Therefore, SNAC routers
   MUST provide DNS-SD service as described in this section.

5.5.1.  Discoverability by hosts on adjacent infrastructure links

   The adjacent infrastructure can be assumed to already enable some
   service discovery mechanism between hosts on the infrastructure
   network, and can be assumed to provide a local DNS resolver.
   Therefore, we do not need to define a stub-network-specific mechanism
   for providing these services on the infrastructure network.

   In some cases it will be necessary for hosts on the AIL to be able to
   discover devices on the stub network.  In other cases, this will be
   unnecessary or even undesirable.  For example, it may be undesirable
   for devices on an AIL to be able to discover devices on a Wi-Fi
   tether provided by a mobile phone.

   One example of a use case for stub networks where such discovery is
   desirable is the constrained network use case.  In this case a low-
   power, low-cost stub network provides connectivity for devices that
   provide services to the infrastructure.  For such networks, it is
   necessary that devices on the infrastructure be able to discover
   devices on the stub network.

   The most basic use case for this is to provide feature parity with
   existing solutions like multicast DNS (mDNS).  For example, a light
   bulb with built-in Wi-Fi connectivity might be discoverable on the
   infrastructure link to which it is connected, using mDNS, but likely
   is not discoverable on other links.  To provide equivalent
   functionality for an equivalent device on a constrained network that



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   is a stub network, the stub network device must be discoverable on
   the infrastructure link (which is an AIL from the perspective of the
   stub network).

   If services are to be advertised using DNS Service Discovery
   [RFC6763], there are in principle two ways to accomplish this.  One
   is to present services on the stub network as a DNS zone which can
   then be configured as a browsing domain in the DNS ([RFC6763],
   Section 11).  The second is to advertise stub network services on the
   AIL using multicast DNS (mDNS) [RFC6762].

   Because this document defines behavior for SNAC routers connecting to
   infrastructure networks that do not provide any new mechanism for
   integrating stub networks, there is no way for a SNAC router to
   provide DNS-SD service on an infrastructure link in the form of a DNS
   zone in which to do discovery.  Therefore, service on the
   infrastructure link MUST be provided using an Advertising Proxy, as
   defined in [I-D.ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy].

   One limitation of this solution is that it requires that hosts on the
   stub network use the DNS-SD Service Registration Protocol
   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-srp] to register their DNS-SD advertisements.  This
   means that in the case of a stub network used for WiFi tethering,
   hosts on the stub network will not be discoverable by hosts on the
   infrastructure network.  Any solution to this problem would require
   that the SNAC router provide a Discovery Proxy [RFC8766].  However, a
   discovery proxy is queried using DNS, not mDNS.  This requires
   assistance from the infrastructure network, and is therefore out of
   scope for this document.

5.5.2.  Providing discoverability of adjacent infrastructure hosts on
        the stub network

   Hosts on the stub network may need to discover hosts on the AIL, or
   on the stub network.  In the IoT network example we've been using,
   there might be a light switch on the stub network which needs to be
   able to actuate a light bulb connected to the AIL.  In order to know
   where to send the actuation messages, the light switch will need to
   be able to discover the light bulb's address somehow.

   Because the stub network is managed by SNAC routers, any DNS resolver
   that's available on the stub network will necessarily be provided by
   one or more SNAC routers.  This means that the SNAC router can enable
   discovery of hosts on the infrastructure network by hosts on the stub
   network using a Discovery Proxy [RFC8766].  The Discovery Proxy can
   be advertised as available to hosts on the stub network through the
   DNS resolver provided on the stub network, as described in Section 11
   of [RFC6763].



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   By implication, this means that SNAC routers MUST provide a DNS
   resolver.  In addition, SNAC routers MUST provide DNS zones for each
   AIL, and MUST list these zones in the list of default browsing zones
   as defined in RFC6763.  [[WG: we need to say how these zones are
   named.  Or refer to the Advertising Proxy doc and have that doc say
   how they are named.]]

   The SNAC router MUST also maintain an SRP registrar and use
   registrations made through that registrar to populate a DNS zone
   which is advertised as a default browsing domain, as above.  This SRP
   registrar MUST be advertised on the stub network either using the
   dnssd-srp and/or dnssd-srp-tls service names or some stub-network-
   specific mechanism, the details of which are out of scope for this
   document.

6.  Providing reachability to IPv4-only services to hosts on the stub
    network

   stub networks rely on IPv6 to enable routing between links, which
   would not be possible with IPv4 due to the lack of a standard
   mechanism similar to Router Advertisements in IPv4.  However, it can
   stll be useful for hosts on the stub network to establish
   communications with IPv4-only hosts on the infrastructure network.

   Although NAT64 provides IPv6-only hosts with a way to reach IPv4
   hosts, there is no easy way for an IPv4 host to use NAT64 to
   originate communication with an IPv6 host.  Therefore, this document
   enables IPv6 hosts on the stub network to discover and reach with
   IPv4 hosts on infrastructure, but does not provide a way for
   IPv4-only hosts on infrastructure to communicate to IPv6 hosts on the
   stub network.

   This should be acceptable because hosts on the infrastructure network
   should not be IPv4-only, since the SNAC router is providing IPv6
   service on the infrastructure network that is suitable for
   communicating using IPv6 to hosts on the SNAC network--there should
   not be any hosts on the infrastructure network that can't communicate
   with hosts on the stub network unless such hosts do not have an IPv6
   stack at all.

   So the purpose of providing IPv4 connectivity for SNAC hosts is to
   enable communication with arbitrary IPv4 hosts which may not be on
   the AIL.  This is accomplished by providing NAT64 address translation
   in the SNAC router, and by enabling service discovery using a
   Discovery Proxy.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Stub Network routers must be capable of providing NAT64 themselves,
   and must be capable of discovering the availability of NAT64 service
   on the infrastructure network and providing it when it is available
   and suitable.

   Some network media may provide their own mechanisms for advertising
   NAT64 service to the stub network.  If such a mechanism is available,
   SNAC routers MUST use the mechanism provided by the network medium
   used on the stub network to advertise NAT64 service.  Otherwise,
   NAT64 service MUST be advertised using the PREF64 Router
   Advertisement option [RFC8781].

   There are four possible combinations of circumstances in which to
   consider how to provide NAT64 service:

   1.  Infrastructure provides DHCPv6 PD support, and the infrastructure
       network provides NAT64

   2.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6 PD support, Infrastructure is
       providing NAT64, and there is no IPv4 on infrastructure

   3.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6 PD support, Infrastructure is
       providing NAT64, and there is IPv4 on infrastructure

   4.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6 PD support, infrastructure is
       not providing NAT64 (and may also not be providing IPv6), and
       there is IPv4 on infrastructure

   In the first case, infrastructure-provided NAT64 is preferred, and
   the SNAC router MUST advertise this service to the stub network.

   In the second case, there is no way to provide connectivity to the
   infrastructure: we don't have IPv6 routing other than to the adjacent
   infrastructure link, because we don't have a routable prefix, we
   don't have NAT64 for the same reason, and we don't have IPv4, so the
   SNAC router can't do NAT64 on its own.  In this case, the SNAC router
   MUST NOT advertise NAT64 service.

   In the third case, despite the infrastructure providing NAT64, we
   can't use it, so the SNAC router MUST provide its own NAT64 service.

   In the fourth case, the SNAC router MUST provide its own NAT64
   service.








Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   An additional complication is that there may be more than one SNAC
   router connecting the stub network to infrastructure.  In this case,
   it may be desirable to limit the number of SNAC routers providing
   NAT64 service, or it may be acceptable for all SNAC routers to
   provide it.

   In the latter case, this should not be a problem: since each SNAC
   router is using its own ULA Site Prefix to provide NAT64, any 5-tuple
   that goes through a SNAC router's NAT64 translator will necessarily
   have as its destination an IPv6 address in a particular NAT64 prefix,
   and that address will select the correct SNAC router through which to
   send the packet for translation.  This also works on the return path
   because each SNAC router has its own IPv4 address, and the return
   packet will be destined for that IPv4 packet, and hence will always
   return through the SNAC router that translated it on the way out.

   A further complication is that in some cases, some SNAC routers
   connected to the stub network may not be able to advertise an
   infrastructure-provided NAT64 prefix, while others may.  In this
   case, when the infrastructure-provided NAT64 service appears on the
   stub network, SNAC routers that are not able to advertise an
   infrastructure NAT64 service MUST NOT do so.

   To differentiate between infrastructure-provided NAT64 service and
   SNAC router-provided NAT64 service, SNAC routers that advertise
   infrastructure-provided NAT64 service MUST use a preference of medium
   for this service.  SNAC routers advertising their own service MUST
   use a preference of low.

   In some cases a SNAC router may be administratively configured with a
   NAT64 prefix.  In this situation, the SNAC router MUST advertise the
   prefix with a preference of high.

   SNAC routers must monitor the advertisement of other NAT64 prefixes
   on the stub network.  If a SNAC router is advertising a NAT64 prefix,
   and a NAT64 prefix is advertised on the stub network with a higher
   preference, the SNAC router SHOULD deprecate the prefix it is
   advertising.

6.1.  NAT64 provided by infrastructure

   Stub networks are defined to be IPv6-only because it would be
   difficult to implement a stub network using IPv4 technology.
   However, stub network devices may need to be able to communicate with
   IPv4-only services either on the infrastructure network, or on the
   global internet.  Ideally, the infrastructure network fully supports
   IPv6, and all services on the infrastructure network are
   IPv6-capable.  In this case, perhaps the infrastructure network



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   provides NAT64 service to IPv4-only hosts on the internet.  In this
   ideal setting, the SNAC router need do nothing—the infrastructure
   network is doing it all.

   In this situation, if there are multiple SNAC routers, each connected
   to the same AIL, there is no need for special behavior—each SNAC
   router can advertise a default route, and any SNAC router may be used
   to route NAT64 traffic.  If some SNAC routers are connected to
   different AILs than others, some of which support NAT64 and some of
   which do not, then the default route may not carry traffic to the
   correct link for NAT64 service.  In this case, a more specific
   address to the infrastructure NAT64 prefix(es) MUST be advertised by
   those SNAC routers that are able to discover it.

   In order for infrastructure-provided NAT64 to work, the stub network
   must have an OSNR prefix that is known to the infrastructure.
   Typically this means that the SNAC router must have acquired this
   prefix using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation.  Unless otherwise configured
   to do so, the SNAC router MUST NOT advertise infrastructure-provided
   NAT64 service on the stub network if it has not acquired the OSNR
   prefix through DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation.

6.2.  NAT64 provided by SNAC router(s)

   Most infrastructure networks at present do not provide NAT64 service.
   Many infrastructure networks do not provide DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation.
   In these cases it is necessary for SNAC routers to be able to provide
   NAT64 service if IPv4 hosts are to be reachable from the stub
   network.  Therefore, SNAC routers MUST be capable of providing NAT64
   service to the stub network.  When infrastructure-provided NAT64
   service is not present or is not usable, and when no other NAT64
   service is already advertised on the stub network, SNAC routers MUST,
   by default, enable their own NAT64 service and advertise it on the
   stub network.

   To provide NAT64 service, a SNAC router must allocate a NAT64 prefix.
   For convenience, the stub network allocates a single prefix out of
   the ULA Site Prefix that it maintains.  Out of the 2^16 possible
   subnets of the /48, the SNAC router SHOULD use the numerically
   highest /64 prefix.

   If there are multiple SNAC routers providing connectivity between the
   stub network and infrastructure, each stub network uses its own NAT64
   prefix—there is no common NAT64 prefix.  The reason for this is that
   NAT64 translation is not stateless, and is tied to the SNAC router's
   IPv4 address.  Therefore each NAT64 egress is not equivalent.





Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   A stub network that services a Wi-Fi stub network SHOULD provide
   DNS64 translation: hosts on the stub network cannot be assumed to be
   able to do DNS64 synthesis in the stub resolver.  In this case the
   DNS resolver on the SNAC router MUST honor the 'CD' and 'DO' flag
   bits if received in a request, since this indicates that the stub
   resolver on the requestor intends to do DNSSEC validation.  In this
   case, the resolver on the SNAC router MUST NOT perform DNS64
   synthesis.

   On specific stub networks it may be desirable to require the stub
   network device to perform DNS64 synthesis.  Stub network routers for
   such networks do not need to provide DNS64 synthesis.  Instead, they
   MUST provide an ipv4only.arpa answer that advertises the NAT64 prefix
   for that SNAC router, and MUST provide an explicit route to that
   NAT64 prefix on the stub network using RA or whatever technology is
   specific to that stub network type.

   In constrained networks it can be very useful if stub network
   resolvers provide the information required to do DNS64 translation in
   the answer to the AAAA query.  If the answer to an AAAA query comes
   back with "no data" (not NXDOMAIN), this suggests that there may be
   an A record.  In this case, the stub network's resolver SHOULD
   attempt to look up an A record on the same name.  If such a record
   exists, the resolver SHOULD return no data in the Answer section of
   the DNS response, and SHOULD provide any CNAME records that were
   involved in returning the "no data" answer to the AAAA query, and
   SHOULD provide any A records that were ultimately returned, in the
   Additional section.  The resolver should also include an
   ipv4only.arpa record in the Additional section.

7.  Handling partitioning events on a stub network

   Some technologies used for stub networks, for example Thread or
   6LoWPAN mesh networks, can produce partitioned networks, where what
   is notionally the same stub network winds up looking like two or more
   discrete links.  For mesh networks, such partitions can form and
   rejoin over time as a result of either changes in radio propagation
   or the addition of, or removal of, devices on the mesh.

   On stub networks that can partition, one way of detecting that a
   partition has occurred is to notice that the SNAC router that has
   advertised the on-link prefix for the stub network is no longer
   reachable via the stub network.  When this occurs, SNAC routers that
   notice this loss of reachability MUST advertise a ULA Link Prefix
   derived from their ULA Site Prefix on the stub network.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   An implication of this is that when such a partition forms, the same
   ULA Link Prefix can’t be advertised on both partitions, since this
   will result in ambiguous routing.  We address this problem by
   requiring that each SNAC router generate its own ULA Site Prefix.
   This prefix is then available for two purposes: providing addressing
   on the AIL, if needed, and providing addressing on the stub network,
   if needed.

   When partitions of this type occur, they may also heal.  When a
   partition heals in a situation where two SNAC routers have both been
   advertising a prefix, it will now appear that there are two prefixes
   on the stub network.

   When the time comes to deprecate one or more prefixes as a result of
   a network partition healing, only one prefix should remain.  If there
   are any GUA prefixes, and if there is no specific configuration
   contradicting this, the GUA prefix that is numerically lowest should
   be kept, and all others deprecated.  If there are no GUA prefixes,
   then the ULA Link Prefix that is numerically lowest should be kept,
   and the others deprecated.  By using this approach, it is not
   necessary for the routers to coordinate in advance.

8.  Services Provided by SNAC routers

   In order to provide network access, SNAC routers must provide some
   network services to the stub network.  We have previously discussed
   the following services:

   DNS Resolver:  The stub network MUST provide a DNS resolver.  If RAs
      are in use on the stub network, the DNS resolver is advertised in
      the Router Advertisement Recursive DNS Server option.  If RAs are
      not in use on the stub network, then the mechanism whereby the DNS
      resolver is advertised by the SNAC router is specific to that type
      of stub network.

   DHCPv6 Server:  The use of DHCPv6 on the stub network is NOT
      RECOMMENDED.  In some cases it may necessary, but should be
      disabled by default if the SNAC router provides this capability at
      all.

   Discovery Proxy:  In order to discover services on the AIL, SNAC
      routers MUST act as Discovery Proxies for any AILs to which they
      are attached.

   SRP Registrar:  SNAC routers MUST provide SRP registrar service.
      This service MUST be advertised using DNS-SD in a legacy browsing
      domain that is discoverable through the SNAC router's resolver.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   Legacy Browsing Domains:  The stub resolver must advertise legacy
      browsing domains for each AIL, for the zone that is maintained by
      its SRP service, and in addition must list the legacy browsing
      domains provided by the infrastructure network, if any.

   NAT64:  As mentioned above, SNAC routers may need to provide NAT64
      service so that devices on the stub network can communicate with
      IPv4 hosts on the infrastructure network and the global internet.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

10.  Security Considerations

   Because a SNAC router operates as an IPv6 router that sends and
   receives IPv6 Neighbor Discovery protocol messages, the security
   considerations of Section 11 of [RFC4861] apply.  No additional
   security considerations are identified.

11.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4191]  Draves, R. and D. Thaler, "Default Router Preferences and
              More-Specific Routes", RFC 4191, DOI 10.17487/RFC4191,
              November 2005, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4191>.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, DOI 10.17487/RFC4193, October 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4193>.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4861, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.

   [RFC6763]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "DNS-Based Service
              Discovery", RFC 6763, DOI 10.17487/RFC6763, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6763>.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   [RFC7084]  Singh, H., Beebee, W., Donley, C., and B. Stark, "Basic
              Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge Routers", RFC 7084,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7084, November 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7084>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.

   [RFC8415]  Mrugalski, T., Siodelski, M., Volz, B., Yourtchenko, A.,
              Richardson, M., Jiang, S., Lemon, T., and T. Winters,
              "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)",
              RFC 8415, DOI 10.17487/RFC8415, November 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8415>.

   [RFC8766]  Cheshire, S., "Discovery Proxy for Multicast DNS-Based
              Service Discovery", RFC 8766, DOI 10.17487/RFC8766, June
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8766>.

   [RFC8781]  Colitti, L. and J. Linkova, "Discovering PREF64 in Router
              Advertisements", RFC 8781, DOI 10.17487/RFC8781, April
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8781>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-srp]
              Lemon, T. and S. Cheshire, "Service Registration Protocol
              for DNS-Based Service Discovery", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dnssd-srp-25, 4 March 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dnssd-
              srp-25>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy]
              Cheshire, S. and T. Lemon, "Advertising Proxy for DNS-SD
              Service Registration Protocol", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy-04, 4
              March 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy-04>.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]
              Hui, J., "SNAC Router Flag in ICMPv6 Router Advertisement
              Messages", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              6man-snac-router-ra-flag-03, 4 December 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-6man-
              snac-router-ra-flag-03>.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   [I-D.ietf-dhc-rfc8415bis]
              Mrugalski, T., Volz, B., Richardson, M., Jiang, S., and T.
              Winters, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
              (DHCPv6)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              dhc-rfc8415bis-07, 12 December 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dhc-
              rfc8415bis-07>.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-pio-pflag]
              Colitti, L., Linkova, J., Ma, X., and D. Lamparter,
              "Signaling DHCPv6 Prefix per Client Availability to
              Hosts", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-6man-
              pio-pflag-12, 8 October 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-6man-
              pio-pflag-12>.

12.  Informative References

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2328, April 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2328>.

   [RFC4944]  Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
              "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4
              Networks", RFC 4944, DOI 10.17487/RFC4944, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4944>.

   [RFC6282]  Hui, J., Ed. and P. Thubert, "Compression Format for IPv6
              Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based Networks", RFC 6282,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6282, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6282>.

   [RFC9663]  Colitti, L., Linkova, J., Ed., and X. Ma, Ed., "Using
              DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation (DHCPv6-PD) to Allocate Unique
              IPv6 Prefixes per Client in Large Broadcast Networks",
              RFC 9663, DOI 10.17487/RFC9663, October 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9663>.

Appendix A.  Analysis of deployment scenarios in which a SNAC router
             could cause problems

A.1.  Unmanaged home network

   In this scenario, a non-expert home user connects SNAC router to own
   unmanaged home network.  This is the key intended use case for stub
   networks.  This document describes how to implement a SNAC router
   such that it operates correctly in this situation, whether the ISP is
   providing IPv6 reachability to the Internet or not.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   In some unmanaged network settings, there is a "guest" network in
   addition to the main network.  In this configuration, if a SNAC
   router is added to the guest infrastructure network, no communication
   will be possible.  The general intended behavior of the guest network
   is to isolate untrusted hosts.  Since this would be the intended
   behavior on the part of the owner of the network, it won't be a
   surprise to them, since they had to explicitly give the SNAC router's
   owner the guest network credentials and not the main network
   credentials.  This should also mean that the owner of the SNAC router
   will not expect it to function in this scenario.

   An additional feature of some unmanaged networks is that the owner of
   the network can choose to isolate all devices on the network, so that
   devices on the network are able to use the Internet, but not
   communicate with each other.  This is essentially the same as being
   connected to the guest network, except that there is no other
   network.  In this case we would expect that the owner of the network
   doesn't expect any devices attached to the network to be able to
   communicate with any other device, so the failure of devices
   connected to infrastructure to communicate with devices on the stub
   network would not be a surprise.  The owner of the SNAC router might
   be surprised in this case, but ultimately the owner of the
   infrastructure network gets to make this decision, and there isn't
   anything we can or should do on behalf of the SNAC router's owner in
   this case.

A.2.  Use on an unmanaged (non-home) IPv6 network

   In this scenario we have a site that is not a home, so perhaps a
   restaurant or business, where there is no network operator per se,
   and the network is deployed similarly to a home network.  There is
   little difference between this scenario and an unmanaged home
   network, but expectations may be different.  In particular, it is
   very common in such settings for there to be a guest network for
   visitors, or for the network to enforce isolation between all nodes
   connected to it.

A.3.  Use on a managed network

   In this scenario, a non-expert user attaches a SNAC router to an
   infrastructure network that's managed.  This network has correctly
   deployed RA Guard and/or port-based access control.  As a result, the
   SNAC router won't succeed in advertising a prefix on the managed
   network.  Communications originating on the stub network that are
   able to communicate using NAT64 will still work.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   In the managed network case, it's possible that the network operator
   is willing to permit SNAC routers to be attached to the network by
   users.  In this case, they might either not deploy RA guard, or they
   might deploy working DHCPv6 prefix delegation.  This could be PD-per-
   host (where hosts are encouraged to use prefix delegation) or just
   ordinary prefix delegation (where hosts are given prefix delegation
   if they ask for it, but not encouraged to ask for it).

   In such a situation, if DHCPv6 PD works on the infrastructure link,
   the SNAC router will function correctly, because the delegated prefix
   will be correctly routed.

   It's worth noting that IPv4 devices that act similarly to SNAC
   routers, using NAT64, already exist and may indeed use the stub
   network functionality to support internal connections that aren't
   even apparent to the user.  In this case the SNAC router is not
   relying on RA to function because it's using its IPv4 address and
   NAT64 to provide connectivity, so there is no management issue even
   if RA is blocked.  This is a reasonable use case for IPv6, and the
   current stub network document does in fact enable this use case.

   When a SNAC router is attached to an infrastructure network that has
   deployed RA guard and does not support DHCPv6 prefix delegation, and
   where that infrastructure network does allow the use of multicast
   DNS, services advertised on the stub network will be discoverable on
   the infrastructure network, but will not be reachable.

A.3.1.  Managed networks where DHCPv6 is required but RA guard is not
        present

   There can be a case where an infrastructure does not implement RA
   guard, does not advertise what this document considers to be an
   "acceptable" prefix, and does provide addressing using DHCPv6 IA_NA.
   In this situation, it could be the case that two ULA prefixes are
   being advertised as on-link and one is being advertised as permitting
   autonomous configuration.

   In the case a host that is attempting to communicate with a device
   using a site ULA prefix on a different link may choose a ULA address
   as a source address.  If it were to choose the autonomously-
   configured ULA address as its source address, this would fail,
   because there is no route back to the stub-network-provided ULA
   prefix.








Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 33]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   However, this can only happen in practice if the host did not receive
   an address from DHCPv6.  In this case, the host would not be able to
   communicate anyway.  So the behavior we might see here is that a
   series of IP packets with an unexpected source address might be sent
   to a device on another link, and the device would be unable to send a
   response.

   In such scenarios we have no way to actually know based on the
   network configuration what the operator's intention was.  An operator
   that sees a problem with this can react by implementing RA guard or
   by blocking unknown source addresses at the router, and in so doing
   they would be expressing their intention.  This configuration would
   not cause any new problem: a host that could communicate would still
   be able to communicate, and a host that could not communicate would
   not become able to communicate.

   The one scenario where we could actually see a communication problem
   is when there is a GUA prefix advertised by infrastructure but no ULA
   prefix, but there is a ULA destination to reach.  In this case, the
   longest-matching-prefix algorithm could choose the stub-router-
   provided ULA prefix as a source address to reach the site-provided
   ULA destination, and in this case communication would fail.  Only
   happy eyeballs can correct this situation.

A.3.2.  Use on a managed network without IPv6

   In this scenario, there is no IPv6 service being intentionally
   advertised on a managed network.  Operators of such netowrks may not
   be aware of the possibility of configuring RA guard.  In this
   situation, a SNAC router will connect and advertise services, which
   will be reachable just as they would be in a similar unmanaged
   network.  A SNAC router that conforms to this specification will not
   advertise an IPv6 default route.  Therefore it should not cause
   operational problems, just as connecting an IPv4 NAT gateway in the
   same scenario would not cause operational problems.

Appendix B.  Router Advertisements on the Infrastructure Network

   An active SNAC router sends periodic multicast Router Advertisements
   as well as unicast Router Advertisements on the infrastructure
   network.  These Router Advertisements are filled with the following
   values consistent with the message format given in Section 4.2 of
   [RFC4861]:

   *  Router Lifetime: A SNAC router never advertises itself as a
      default router on infrastructure.  Therefore, the router lifetime
      is always zero in SNAC router advertisements on infrastructure.




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 34]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   *  For the 'M' and 'O' flag bits, section Section 5.1.2.3 specifies
      that they must be zero.

   *  The 'SNAC router' flag bit xref target="I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-
      bit" TBD WaitRef MUST be 1.

   *  In the Cur Hop Limit field: 0

   *  In the Reachable Time field: 0

   *  In the Retrans Timer field: 0

   *  In the options, with the exception of the options listed below,
      SNAC routers MUST NOT send any RA options, since these other
      options are for managing the network, and the SNAC router is not
      responsible for managing the infrastructure network.

   *
      -  Source Link-Layer Address option: Including this option
         whenever possible is RECOMMENDED.  The load balancing use case
         in Section 6.2.3 of [RFC4861] is out of scope for this document
         and is not generally expected to be applicable.  The benefit of
         including this option is that it eliminates the need to do
         neighbor discovery on the SNAC router's link-local address in
         order to get its link-layer address.

      -  MTU option: the SNAC router is not managing the link, and hence
         SHOULD NOT send this option.

      -  Prefix Information options: when there is no suitable prefix
         (See Section 5.1.1) on the infrastructure link, some SNAC
         router will need to send a PIO.  However, unless they are able
         to cooperate in choosing a PIO, only one SNAC routers will send
         it PIO.  How this decision is made is described in
         Section 5.1.2.  When a SNAC router sents this option, the
         following settings apply:

      -
         o  In the 'L' flag bit (on-link): 1.

         o  In the 'A' flag bit (Autonomous address configuration): 1

         o  In the Valid Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (see Section 3), but see
            Section 5.1.2.5.






Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 35]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


         o  In the Preferred Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (see Section 3), but see
            Section 5.1.2.5.

      -  Route Information Option: an active SNAC router always provides
         a Route Information Option for each prefix that is valid on the
         stub network.  This provides a route from the infrastructure
         network to the stub network.  The following settings apply:

      -
         o  Prefix Length: 64

         o  Route Preference: low

         o  Route Lifetime: STUB_NETWORK_REACHABLE_TIME (TBD: what about
            deprecated prefixes?  Add reference to new proposed text
            that addresses issue #67 on github)

         o  Prefix: the prefix advertised on the stub network

   It is expected that all RA options for a SNAC router will fit in a
   single RA.  Therefore, we do not expect SNAC routers to send multiple
   RAs with different information other than to announce that some
   information previously advertised has changed.

Appendix C.  Router Advertisments on the stub network

   A SNAC router sends periodic as well as solicited Router
   Advertisements out its advertising interfaces on the stub network.
   Outgoing Router Advertisements are filled with the following values
   consistent with the message format given in Section 4.2 of [RFC4861]:

   *  Router Lifetime: The SNAC router can be a default router on the
      stub network (see xref target="snac-reachability" TBD fixref).

   *  SNAC routers do not provide DHCP service on the stub network.
      Therefore, the 'M' and 'O' flag bits MUST be zero.

   *  The 'SNAC router' flag bit xref target="I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-
      bit" TBD waitRef MUST be 0.

   *  In the Cur Hop Limit field: 0

   *  In the Reachable Time field: 0

   *  In the Retrans Timer field: 0

   *  In the options, the SNAC router may send options as appropriate.



Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 36]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


   *
      -  Source Link-Layer Address option: Including this option
         whenever possible is RECOMMENDED.  The load balancing use case
         in Section 6.2.3 of [RFC4861] is out of scope for this document
         and is not generally expected to be applicable.  The benefit of
         including this option is that it eliminates the need to do
         neighbor discovery on the SNAC router's link-local address in
         order to get its link-layer address.

      -  MTU option: the SNAC router is managing the link, and hence MAY
         send this option.

      -  Some SNAC router will need to send a PIO.  Normally, only one
         SNAC router will send a PIO.  How this decision is made is
         described in Section 5.2.  When a SNAC router sents this
         option, the following settings apply:

      -
         o  In the 'L' flag bit (on-link): 1.

         o  In the 'A' flag bit (Autonomous address configuration): 1

         o  In the Valid Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (see Section 3), but see
            Section 5.1.2.5.

         o  In the Preferred Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (see Section 3), but see
            Section 5.1.2.5.

      -  Route Information Option: when a SNAC router is not advertising
         a default route, it MUST include one or more RIO options in
         router advertisements on the stub network to provide
         reachability to infrastructure.  This is discussed in
         Section 5.4.  The following settings apply:

         o  Prefix Length: the length of the prefix covered by the
            route, not necessarily 64.

         o  Route Preference: low

         o  Route Lifetime: The lifetime of the prefix on the
            infrastructure link, but no more than
            STUB_NETWORK_REACHABLE_TIME

         o  Prefix: the prefix that is known to be reachable on the
            infrastructure network




Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 37]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks            January 2024


Authors' Addresses

   Ted Lemon
   Apple Inc.
   One Apple Park Way
   Cupertino, California 95014
   United States of America
   Email: mellon@fugue.com


   Jonathan Hui
   Google LLC
   1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
   Mountain View, California 940432
   United States of America
   Email: jonhui@google.com



































Lemon & Hui               Expires 11 July 2024                 [Page 38]
